#1060: Documentation for Usage - Schema (#1061)
AbsaOSS/enceladus: _docs/1.0.0/usage-schema.md

**NB!** All values in _metadata_ have to be entered as *string*. Even in cases
they would conform to other types, like number or Boolean.

<a name="#metadata-star" />\* Value used if nothing is specified in _metadata_

<a name="#metadata-star-star" />\*\* No default exists (as not needed)

<a name="#metadata-star-star-star" />\*\*\* Unless a different default time zone is specified via
`defaultTimestampTimeZone` and `defaultDateTimeZone` application settings

### sourcecolumn

| <sub><sup>Supported by types:</sup></sub> | <sub><sup>[String](#string), [Boolean](#boolean), [Decimal](#decimal), [Long](#long), [Integer](#integer), [Short](#short), [Byte](#byte), [Double](#double), [Float](#float), [Timestamp](#struct), [Date](#timestamp), [Struct](#struct), [Array](#array)</sup></sub> |
|-------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| | |

> The name of the column to get the data from (so have a point only if it differs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The name of the column to get the data from (so it only makes sense if it's different
```

> from field name). The most common use is for the case, when the original column

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from field name). The most common use case is when the original column
```

> name is not a valid Parquet field name. It can be also used in the rate cases,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
name is not a valid Parquet field name. It can also be used in the rare cases
```

when the column needs to be standardized into more fields and/or different
types.

### default

| <sub><sup>Supported by types:</sup></sub> | <sub><sup>[String](#string), [Boolean](#boolean), [Decimal](#decimal), [Long](#long), [Integer](#integer), [Short](#short), [Byte](#byte), [Double](#double), [Float](#float), [Timestamp](#struct), [Date](#timestamp)</sup></sub> |
|-------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| | |

This is the value to be used in case the input is missing (and nulls are not

> allowed) or when the casting (*standardization*) fails. So better

Reviewer: ```suggestion
allowed) or when the casting (*standardization*) fails.
```

> characterization would be, that it’s a *fallback value*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can think of this as a *fallback value*.
```

> Should be noted, that this is the only _metadata_ key recognized that accepts the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It should be noted, that this is the only _metadata_ key which accepts the
```

> `null` value (written like that without quotes) next to string values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`null` value (written without quotes) next to string values.
```

For more about the topic see chapter [Defaults](#defaults).

### pattern

| <sub><sup>Supported by types:</sup></sub> | <sub><sup>[Decimal](#decimal), [Long](#long), [Integer](#integer), [Short](#short), [Byte](#byte), [Double](#double), [Float](#float), [Timestamp](#struct), [Date](#timestamp)</sup></sub> |
|-------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| | |

> The format the input adheres to. Mostly used for timestamp and date entries. But

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The format the input adheres to. Mostly used for timestamp and date entries but
```

> it can be also leveraged in case of numbers. Details for valid patterns are in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it can also be leveraged for numeric types. Details for valid patterns are in
```

the chapter [Parsing](#parsing).

In case ``default`` value is also specified in _metadata_, it needs to adhere to
the pattern.

If [radix](#radix) is specified and differs from the default 10, `pattern` value
will be ignored.

### timezone

| <sub><sup>Supported by types:</sup></sub> | <sub><sup>[Timestamp](#struct), [Date](#timestamp)</sup></sub> |
|-------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|
| | |

> Time zone of the timestamp or date (for later it's generally not recommended). For details see the chapter

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Time zone of the timestamp or date (not recommended for the latter). For details see the chapter
```

[Parsing timestamps and dates](#parsing-timestamps-and-dates).

In case the [`pattern`](#pattern) already includes information to recognize the time zone, the `timezone` entry in _metadata_ will

> be ignored. Namely if the pattern includes *"z"*, *"Z"* or *"X"* placeholder or *"epoch"*, *"epochmilli"*, *"epochmicro"*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be ignored. Namely if the pattern includes the *"z"*, *"Z"* or *"X"* placeholder, or the *"epoch"*, *"epochmilli"*, *"epochmicro"*
```

 and *"epochnano"* keywords.

> **NB!** Due to spark limitation, only time zone ids are accepted as valid values. To get the full list of supported time

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**NB!** Due to a Spark limitation, only time zone IDs are accepted as valid values. To get the full list of supported time
```

 zone denominators see the output of Java's
[`TimeZone.getAvailableIDs()` function](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/TimeZone.html#getAvailableIDs--).

### decimal_separator

| <sub><sup>Supported by types:</sup></sub> | <sub><sup>[Decimal](#decimal), [Long](#long), [Integer](#integer), [Short](#short), [Byte](#byte), [Double](#double), [Float](#float)</sup></sub> |
|-------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| | |

The character separating the integer and the fractional parts of the number.

> Seems pointless for whole numbers, but in case *"."* is used for example as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For whole numbers which use *"."* as the [`grouping_separator`](#grouping_separator), the `decimal_separator` has to be redefined, to avoid conflict.
```

|-------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| | |

Character to mark boundaries between orders of magnitude, usually to mark
thousands, millions etc.

It has to be used in the pattern to be taken into consideration.

### minus_sign

| <sub><sup>Supported by types:</sup></sub> | <sub><sup>[Decimal](#decimal), [Long](#long), [Integer](#integer), [Short](#short), [Byte](#byte), [Double](#double), [Float](#float)</sup></sub> |
|-------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| | |

Character to mark the number is negative. By default, it’s the standard minus
sign (*"-"*).

### allow_infinity

| <sub><sup>Supported by types:</sup></sub> | <sub><sup>[Double](#double), [Float](#float)</sup></sub> |
|-------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| | |

> Flag indicating if the column accepts infinity as a value. Also too big/far

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Flag indicating if the column accepts infinity as a value. When set to true, positive and negative numbers with values that are too large are converted to *infinity* and *-infinity*, respectively.
```

Author: Reworded to:
```
Flag indicating if the column accepts infinity as a value. When set to true, positive and negative numbers with values
that are too large are converted to *infinity* and *-infinity*, respectively. Also the string for infinity _"∞"_ is 
recognized and accepted.
```

Reviewer 2: Looks good, but you should try removing every `also` you write. I promise you almost no sentence will miss it.

negative numbers are converted to become *infinity* or *-infinity* respectively,
if the flag is set to true, instead of failing the *standardization*.

The string representing infinity on input is *"∞"* and *"-∞"* respectively.

### radix

| <sub><sup>Supported by types:</sup></sub> | <sub><sup>[Decimal](#decimal), [Long](#long), [Integer](#integer), [Short](#short), [Byte](#byte)</sup></sub> |
|-------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| | |

> The base (radix) of the numbers entered. Accepted values are numbers between 1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The radix (base) of the numbers entered. Accepted values are numbers between 1
```

> and 36. Also accepted are the following keywords (case insensitive): *"dec"*,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and 36, as well as the following keywords (case insensitive): *"dec"*,
```

*"decimal"*, *"hex"*, *"hexadecimal"*, *"bin"*, *"binary"*, *"oct"*, *"octal"*.

> For higher bases, letters (A, B, C etc.) are used for digits, case insensitive

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For higher bases, letters (A, B, C etc.) are used for digits (case insensitive)
```

again.

> Also for hexadecimal value entries in the form *"0xFF"* are accepted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For hexadecimal values entries in the form of *"0xFF"* are accepted.
```

> If `radix` is specified and differs from the default 10, [pattern](#pattern)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If `radix` is specified as anything other than the default 10, [pattern](#pattern)
```

value will be ignored.

Parsing
-------

### Parsing timestamps and dates

Dates and especially timestamps (date + time) can be tricky. Currently Spark considers all time entries to be in the

> current system time zone by default. (For more detailed explanation of possible issues with that see

Reviewer: ```suggestion
system's time zone by default. (For more detailed explanation of possible issues with that see
```

[Consistent timestamp types in Hadoop SQL engines](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1gNRww9mZJcHvUDCXklzjFEQGpefsuR_akCDfWsdE35Q/edit#heading=h.n699ftkvhjlo).)

To address this potential source of discrepancies the following has been implemented:

1. All Enceladus components are set to run in UTC
1. As part of **Standardization** all time related entries are normalized to UTC
1. There are several methods how to ensure that a timestamp entry is normalized as expected
1. We urge users, that all timestamp entries should include time zone information in one of the supported ways
1. While this is all valid for date entries too, it should be noted that UTC normalization of a date can have unexpected
consequences - namely all dates west from UTC would be shifted to a day earlier

To enable processing of time entries from other systems **Standardization** offers the possibility to convert

> string and even numeric values to timestamp or date types. It's done using Spark's ability to convert strings to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
string and even numeric values to timestamp or date types. This is done using Spark's ability to convert strings to
```

| `_epochmicro_`                             | Microseconds since 1970/01/01 00:00:00.0000      | 1557136493128789, 1557136493128789.999 |
| `_epochnano_`<sup>[*](#parsing-star)</sup> | Nanoseconds since 1970/01/01 00:00:00.0000       | 1557136493128789101                    |
| `i`                                        | Microsecond                                      | 111, 321001                            |
| `n`<sup>[*](#parsing-star)</sup>           | Nanosecond                                       | 999, 542113879                         |

<a name="parsing-star" />"\* While _nanoseconds_ designation is supported on input, it's not supported in storage or further usage. So any
   value behind microseconds precision will be truncated.

**NB!** Spark uses US Locale and because on-the-fly conversion would be complicated, at the moment we stick to this
hardcoded locale as well. E.g. `am/pm` for `a` placeholder, English names of days and months etc.

**NB!** The keywords are case **insensitive**. Therefore, there is no difference between `epoch` and `EpoCH`.

#### Time Zone support

> As it has been mentioned, it's highly recommended to use timestamps with the time zone. But it's not unlikely that the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As mentioned, it is highly recommended to use timestamps with time zone but it's not unlikely that the
```

> source for standardization doesn't provide the time zone information. On the other hand, these times are usually within

Reviewer: ```suggestion
source for standardization doesn't provide time zone information. On the other hand, these times are usually within
```

one time zone. To ensure proper standardization, the schema's _metadata_ can include the `timezone` value.

> All timestamps then will be standardized as belonging to the particular time zone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When set, all timestamps in the column will be standardized as belonging to the particular time zone.
```

E.g. _2019-05-04 11:31:10_ with `timzene` specified as _CET_ will be standardized to _2019-05-04 10:31:10_ (UTC of
course)

### Parsing numbers

When converting *string* to any of the numeric types there are two standard formats accepted:

> 1) the usual string of digits with the eventual minus or plus sign in front and optional decimal separator (e.g *3.14*)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. the usual string of digits with the eventual minus or plus sign in front and optional decimal separator (e.g *3.14*)
```

> 2) the scientific notation, where the numbers are expressed as the product of a mantissa and a power of ten

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. the scientific notation, where the numbers are expressed as the product of a mantissa and a power of ten
```

(e.g. 1234 can be expressed as 1.234 x 10^3 = 1.234E3)

Note, that for whole numbers ([Long](#long), [Integer](#integer), [Short](#short) and [Byte](#byte)), the decimal

> separator mustn't be present.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
separator must not be present.
```

> If the string is being parse to [decimal type](#decimal) and the input has more decimal places than is the *scale* of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the string is being parsed to [decimal type](#decimal) and the input has more decimal places than is the *scale* of the
```

decimal type, the result will be rounded to the number of decimal places allowed by *scale*.

#### Radix usage

> For whole numbers , the numbers can be entered using a different radix (base) then the usual 10. For radices smaller then

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For whole numbers, the numbers can be entered using a different radix (base) than the usual 10. For radices smaller than
```

10, the appropriate subset of numeric digits are accepted. For radices above 10, letters are used for the digit
representation. The letters are case insensitive, therefore 1Fa = 1fA.

To specify a non-standard radix (different from 10), use the [`Radix` *metadata* key](#radix). The radix has to be between 1
and 36.

#### Pattern parsing

> For cases when the number is formatted in some other manner, patterns can come for rescue. The parsing is executed using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the number is formatted in some non-standard way you can use a pattern. The parsing is executed using
```

the *Java* class `DecimalFormat`, whose [documentation](#https://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/api/java/text/DecimalFormat.html)
provides the most comprehensive explanation of patterns and their usage.

Pattern contains a positive and negative subpattern, for example, `#,##0.00;(#,##0.00)`. Each subpattern has a prefix,

> numeric part, and suffix. The negative subpattern is optional; if absent, then the positive subpattern prefixed with the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
numeric part, and suffix. The negative subpattern is optional; if absent, the positive subpattern prefixed with the
```

be distinct characters, or parsing will be impossible.

| Symbol | Location              | Meaning                                                                                                                                                             | Metadata to change                                                                 |
|--------|-----------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `0`    | Number                | Digit                                                                                                                                                               |                                                                                    |
| `#`    | Number                | Digit, zero shows as absent                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                    |

> | `.`    | Number                | Decimal separator or monetary decimal separator                                                                                                                     | [Decimal separator](#deciaml_separator) NB!<sup>[*](#pattern-parsing-star)</sup>   |

Reviewer: What's a `monetary decimal separator`? How is it different from a regular `Decimal separator`?

| `E`    | Number                | Separates mantissa and exponent in scientific notation. Need not be quoted in prefix or suffix.                                                                     |                                                                                    |
| `;`    | Subpattern boundary   | Separates positive and negative subpatterns                                                                                                                         |                                                                                    |
| `%`    | Prefix or suffix      | Divide by 100 on parsing                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                    |
| `‰`    | Prefix or suffix      | Divide by 1000 on parsing                                                                                                                                           |                                                                                    |

> | `'`    | Prefix or suffix      | Used to quote special characters in a prefix or suffix, for example, "'#'#" formats 123 to "#123". To create a single quote itself, use two in a row: "# o''clock". |                                                                                    |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `'`    | Prefix or suffix      | Used to quote special characters in a prefix or suffix, for example, the "'#'#" pattern allows the value `#123` to be read in as the number `123`. To create a single quote itself, use two in a row: "# o''clock". |                                                                                    |
```
Let's keep in mind that this is meant for standardizing to numeric types, so it reads in formatted strings and produces numbers, not the other way around.

| `∞`    | *not part of pattern* | String ti represent infinity                                                                                                                                        |                                                                                    |

<a name="pattern-parsing-star"/>\* while these can ne changed, in the [`pattern`]($pattern) the default value *must* be 
used. E.g. *"."*, *"."* and *"-"*.

**NB!** If there's no special format of the input, it's advised to avoid the usage of patterns due to the added
performance hit (parsing using a pattern adds computational overhead). It's still possible to redefine the special
symbols like [decimal separator](#decimal_separator) or [minus sign](#minus_sign) even without the pattern.

#### Number parsing peculiarities

> - number of `#` and `0` in pattern is not reliable, stuff is parsed regardless (e.g. *"0.0"* produces the same result as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- number of `#` and `0` in the pattern is not reliable, the input is parsed regardless (e.g. *"0.0"* produces the same result as
```

*"##.#*)

> - Grouping signs placement "flexible"; in other words if grouping separator has been added to the pattern the number is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Grouping separator placement is "flexible". If the grouping separator has been added to the pattern the number is
```

Author: See comment bellow

> parser regardless of the position (e.g. pattern `#,##0.#` will parse _1,000.0_, _1,1234.5_ so as  _2000._)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
parsed regardless of position (e.g. pattern `#,##0.#` will parse _1,000.0_, _1,1234.5_ and  _2000._)
```

Author: Reworded it to:
```
- Grouping separator placement is "flexible". If the grouping separator has been added to the pattern the number is
parsed regardless of the placement(s) of the grouping separator in the parsed strings (e.g. pattern `#,##0.#` will parse
_1,000.0_, _1,1234.5_ so as  _2000._)
```

> - Grouping sign not accepted in decimal places

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Grouping separator is not accepted in decimal places
```

> - _"+"_ not accepted if pattern is specified unless explicitly mentioned

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- _"+"_ not accepted when pattern is specified, unless explicitly present in the pattern
```

- `%` and `‰` in fractional and decimal values and patterns divide the number by 100 and 1000 (in integrals as well, but
then they are usually not whole numbers)

> - Even if redefined  the standard grouping and decimal separators **needs to be used** in the pattern

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Even if redefined the standard grouping and decimal separators **need to be used** in the pattern
```

- If pattern is used, `e` is not accepted only `E` in the exponential expresion (without a pattern both are recognized)

Defaults
--------

> As it was described, in case when the standardization is unsuccessful, either due to missing data in a column

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As described, when a field fails to standardize, either because of missing data in a non-nullable column
```

> non-nullable column or because the casting fails, default value is used in that particular column and row.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or because it was being cast to the wrong type, the filed is populated with a default value and an error is added to the error column.
```

### Explicit default

The value optionally specified in the schema of the dataset for **Standardization** in _metadata_ [Default](#default)
property to be used for the particular column.

### Global default values

> The value used in case of need of the default value and if _explicit default_ was not defined. The actual values are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The value used when _explicit default_ was not defined in the schema:
```

- `null` for nullable column
- `0` for numeric column
- `false` for Boolean column
- `""` (empty string) for string column
- `1970/01/01` for date column
- `1970/01/01 00:00:00` for timestamp column

> - default timezone if not specified for both timestamps and dates is *UTC*; this can be changed via

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- default timezone if not specified for either timestamps or dates is *UTC*; this can be changed via
```

- default locale and the decimal symbols based on that is *US*. Therefore:
  - minus sign is *"-"*
  - decimal separator is *"."*
  - grouping separator is *","*

### Explicit default values restrictions

> - The value has to be a string convertible to the the field's type and fitting withing its size limitations (e.g._"200"_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The value has to be a string convertible to the field's type and fitting within its size limitations (e.g._"200"_
```

Reviewer 2: This is the only one you missed @benedeki

        "name": "employeeNumbers",
        "type": {
            "type": "array",
            "elementType": {
                "type": "struct",
                "fields": [{
                    "name": "numberType",
                    "type": "string",
                    "nullable": true,
                    "metadata": {
                    }
                },
                {
                    "name": "numbers",
                    "type": {
                        "type": "array",
                        "elementType": "integer",
                        "containsNull": true
                    },
                    "nullable": true,
                    "metadata": {
                    }
                }]
            },
            "containsNull": true
        },
        "nullable": true,
        "metadata": {
        }
    },
        {
        "name": "startDate",
        "type": "date",
        "nullable": false,
        "metadata": {
            "pattern": "yyyy-MM-dd"
        }
    },
        {
        "name": "updated",
        "type": "timestamp",
        "nullable": true,
        "metadata": {
            "pattern": "yyyyMMdd.HHmmss"
        }
    }
    ]
}
```

> Example of data adhering to the above schema can be find [here](https://github.com/AbsaOSS/enceladus/blob/develop/standardization/src/test/scala/za/co/absa/enceladus/standardization/samples/TestSamples.scala).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Example of data adhering to the above schema can be found [here](https://github.com/AbsaOSS/enceladus/blob/develop/standardization/src/test/scala/za/co/absa/enceladus/standardization/samples/TestSamples.scala).
```

---
layout: docs
title: Usage
version: '1.0.0'
categories:
    - '1.0.0'
---
Schema
======

> <!-- toc -->

Author: A dedicated Issue I sense here 👽

- [Intro](#intro)

- [Data types](#data-types)

  - [String](#string)

  - [Boolean](#boolean)

  - [Decimal](#decimal)

  - [Long](#long)

  - [Integer](#integer)

  - [Short](#short)

  - [Byte](#byte)

  - [Double](#double)

  - [Float](#float)

  - [Timestamp](#struct)

  - [Date](#timestamp)

  - [Struct](#struct)

  - [Array](#array)

- [Metadata](#metadata)

  - [sourcecolumn](#sourcecolumn)

  - [default](#default)

  - [pattern](#pattern)

  - [timezone](#timezone)

  - [decimal_separator](#decimal_separator)

  - [grouping_separator](#grouping_separator)

  - [minus_sign](#minus_sign)

  - [allow_infinity](#allow_infinity)

  - [radix](#radix)

- [Parsing](#parsing)

  - [Parsing timestamps and dates](#parsing-timestamps-and-dates)

  - [Parsing numbers](#parsing-numbers)

- [Defaults](#defaults)

  - [Explicit default](#explicit-default)

  - [Global default values](#global-default-values)

  - [Local default values restrictions](#explicit-default-values-restrictions)
<!-- tocstop -->

Intro

> -----

Reviewer 3: I am missing that "By defining schema u define which columns are omitted" or something of sorts.

Author: Will try to add something in this regard.

{
        "name": "employeeNumbers",
        "type": {
            "type": "array",
            "elementType": {
                "type": "struct",
                "fields": [{
                    "name": "numberType",
                    "type": "string",
                    "nullable": true,
                    "metadata": {
                    }
                },
                {
                    "name": "numbers",
                    "type": {
                        "type": "array",
                        "elementType": "integer",
                        "containsNull": true
                    },
                    "nullable": true,
                    "metadata": {
                    }
                }]
            },
            "containsNull": true
        },
        "nullable": true,
        "metadata": {
        }
    },
        {
        "name": "startDate",
        "type": "date",
        "nullable": false,
        "metadata": {
            "pattern": "yyyy-MM-dd"
        }
    },
        {
        "name": "updated",
        "type": "timestamp",
        "nullable": true,
        "metadata": {
            "pattern": "yyyyMMdd.HHmmss"
        }
    }
    ]

> }

Author: Will add a link to https://github.com/AbsaOSS/enceladus/blob/develop/standardization/src/test/scala/za/co/absa/enceladus/standardization/samples/TestSamples.scala

```

Data types
----------

### String

The data type representing *String* values.

> | <sub><sup>Metadata keys:</sup></sub> | <sub><sup>[sourcecolumn](#sourcecolumn), [default](#default)</sup></sub> |

Author: The key reason here is a quick reference. The actual *metadata* and to which types they apply is described elsewhere, in big letters 😉

|--------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|
| | |

### Array

The data type representing an array of values of another type.

The type is specified as struct of following properties:

- `type` - string value *"array"*
- `elementType` - the type of the elements of the array, can be any of the types including [`struct`](#struct) and
[`array`](#array)
- `containsNull`- boolean value

| <sub><sup>Metadata keys:</sup></sub> | <sub><sup>[sourcecolumn](#sourcecolumn)</sup></sub> |
|--------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|
| | |

Metadata
--------

*Standardization* can be influenced by `metadata` in the schema of the data.
They are non-mandatory additional properties. Here are the recognized ones with
the description of their purpose (with detailed description bellow):

| Property                                  | Target data type           | Description                                                                                                                                  | Example      | Default[\*](#metadata-star)              |

> |-------------------------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------|------------------------------------------|

Author: Another separated Issue.

| [minus_sign](#minus_sign)                 | any numeric type           | Character to mark the number is negative.                                                                                                    | *N*          | *-*                                      |
| [allow_infinity](#allow_infinity)         | float & double             | Flag indicating if the column accepts infinity as a value (also too big/far negative numbers are converted to become *infinity*/*-infinity*) | *true*       | *false*                                  |
| [radix](#radix)                           | long, integer, short, byte | The base of the numbers provided                                                                                                             | *hex*        | *10*                                     |

**NB!** All values in _metadata_ have to be entered as *string*. Even in cases
they would conform to other types, like number or Boolean.

> <a name="#metadata-star" />\* Value used if nothing is specified in _metadata_

Reviewer 3: For some reason, these don't work for me.

Author: Found the reason - the anchor name had a # character at the beginning.

characterization would be, that it’s a *fallback value*.

Should be noted, that this is the only _metadata_ key recognized that accepts the
`null` value (written like that without quotes) next to string values.

For more about the topic see chapter [Defaults](#defaults).

### pattern

| <sub><sup>Supported by types:</sup></sub> | <sub><sup>[Decimal](#decimal), [Long](#long), [Integer](#integer), [Short](#short), [Byte](#byte), [Double](#double), [Float](#float), [Timestamp](#struct), [Date](#timestamp)</sup></sub> |
|-------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| | |

The format the input adheres to. Mostly used for timestamp and date entries. But
it can be also leveraged in case of numbers. Details for valid patterns are in
the chapter [Parsing](#parsing).

In case ``default`` value is also specified in _metadata_, it needs to adhere to
the pattern.

If [radix](#radix) is specified and differs from the default 10, `pattern` value
will be ignored.

### timezone

> | <sub><sup>Supported by types:</sup></sub> | <sub><sup>[Timestamp](#struct), [Date](#timestamp)</sup></sub> |

Reviewer 3: A bit off
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/17467768/69501587-8abbb800-0f06-11ea-8c72-00504a39a833.png)

sign (*"-"*).

### allow_infinity

| <sub><sup>Supported by types:</sup></sub> | <sub><sup>[Double](#double), [Float](#float)</sup></sub> |
|-------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| | |

Flag indicating if the column accepts infinity as a value. Also too big/far
negative numbers are converted to become *infinity* or *-infinity* respectively,
if the flag is set to true, instead of failing the *standardization*.

The string representing infinity on input is *"∞"* and *"-∞"* respectively.

### radix

| <sub><sup>Supported by types:</sup></sub> | <sub><sup>[Decimal](#decimal), [Long](#long), [Integer](#integer), [Short](#short), [Byte](#byte)</sup></sub> |
|-------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| | |

The base (radix) of the numbers entered. Accepted values are numbers between 1
and 36. Also accepted are the following keywords (case insensitive): *"dec"*,

> *"decimal"*, *"hex"*, *"hexadecimal"*, *"bin"*`, *"binary"*, *"oct"*, *"octal"*.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
*"decimal"*, *"hex"*, *"hexadecimal"*, *"bin"*, *"binary"*, *"oct"*, *"octal"*.
```
